The Great Depression  
Between 1929 and 1933, the United States had four years of the worst economic depression  ever seen 
in its history. At his inaugural address, Franklin D. Roosevelt states “the only thing we have to fea r is 
fear itself. ” There were  two Pre sidents during the Great Depression, Herbe rt Hoover and Franklin D. 
Roosevelt  and its recovery took 12 years.  
                                                                
                                      Herbert Hoover                   Franklin D. Roosevelt  
 
Timeline of events for the Stock Market Crash of 1929  
• Black Thursday  – October 24th: the market saw an unexpected sell , stock prices plunged.  
• Friday – October 25th: a group of bankers bought millions of dollars’ worth  of stock hoping to 
stabilize prices . It worked, only for one day!  
• Monday – October 28th: the selling frenzy  continued  
• Black Tuesday – October 29th: the bottom fell out of the S tock Market . Millions of people 
ordered “sell ” but no buyers were found . 
The Causes Leading to the St ock Marke t Crash  
A Rising Stock Market  
March 1928 to September 1 929 The average investor doubled his money in less than 1 year. 
Millions of Americans in vested in the Market  
Uneven Distrib ution of Income  The fop 5% of the country had  33% of the nation ’s wealth.  
Stock Market Speculation  People were not investing in a c ompany . They were only short -
term speculating for a quick financial gain  
Buying on Margin  Investors were first allowed to borrow most of the cost of a stock. 
They could make down -payments  as low as 10% of the total . In 
order to make money the s tock must increase in value in order for 
them to repay the loan.  
Excessive Lines of Credit  Installment buying, promoted by advertising  campaigns were 
common.  
Overproduction of 
Consumer Goods  Too many items were for sale and stagnan t wages meant that 
averag e people were no longer able to but new goods.  
Weak farm Economy  Overproduction of crops , high debt, low prices, severe weather 
and a drought all affected farmers and buyers.  
Poor Government Policies  There was no government control over business. In addition th ere 
was a high tariff  and bad international practices.  
Global Economic Problems  The effects of World War I, Germany not paying its war debts, the 
Dawes Plan had worked  but stopped when the “Crash ” came.  
 


The Eff ects of the Stock Market Crash  
• GNP (Gross National Product) the total of all of the goods and services produced in the country 
during one year went from $104 billio n to $56 billion in four years  
• The National Income declined  over 50%  
• 25% of the banks closed and wiped out over  $10 millio n in savings accounts  
• By 1933, 1 3 million were unemplo yed (25% of the workforce) and this did not include farmers  
• Poverty and homelessness swept through the nation  
• Family stress increased as many were searching for work  
• Mortgage foreclosur es and evictions took place every day  
 
 
A typical “bread line ” during the Great Depression  
 
President Herbert Hoover ’s Policies  
Initially, Hoover did not believe that the Great Depression would last. He thought that the nation should 
only t ake v oluntary actions and use minimal restraints.  
1. Businesses should cut wages to compensate  
2. Unions should not be able  to st rike 
3. Private charities must increase their efforts t o help the needy and jobless  
By the 1930 ’s, Hoover ’s approach was not enough and the government had to take more action. 
However, Hoover ’s belief  was that of a traditional view , relief must come from the states and local 
governments, and not from t he federal government .  
Hawley -Smoot Tariff of 1930  – saw the highest ever import rates of duty. Amounts varies from 31% to 
49% based on the item. Europe counteracted  creating a lack of trade, only worsening the depression.  


In 1931 there was a Debt Moratorium  where  a suspension of payments for international debts was put 
into place. The results were disas trous. 
1. The international economy suffered major loan defaults  
2. Many large dep ositors withdrew their money from banks, making it even w orse.  
Hoover’s Domestic Programs were Too Little, Too Late!  
The Federal Farm Board  was created in 1929 to hold wh eat and cotton in storage locations. How ever, 
the farmers kept growing crops and overproduction increased.  
The Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC)  was a federally -funded , government -owned corporation 
created in 1932 with the goal to stabilize  railroads, banks, life -insurance companies . This would create a 
“trickle -down” effect on the eco nomy. However, the Democra ts were against this policy as they 
believed that it only catered to the rich.  
The Farm Holiday Association  was created to stop the entire 1932 crops from ge tting to markets . It did 
not want the farmers to grow anything  for a n entire year . It failed as crops were still grown and 
harvested.  
The Bonus March of 1932  saw thousands of unemployed veterans camp out in Washing ton, D.C.  
• Congress failed to pass their bonus bill  
• Two veterans died when a clash with police  and Hoover ordered federal tr oops to break -up the 
event  
• General Douglas MacArthur used tanks and tear gas to des troy their “shantytown ”  
• President Hoover was now seen as heartless and uncaring  
 
                          
                                   Bonus March Veterans                   Federal Troops to break up the protest  
The Election of 1932 saw Hoover defeated as the Democrats feared another term would only make life 
worse. Elected was Franklin Delano Roosevelt , the ex -Governor of New York . His Vice -President was 
John Nance Garner  of Texas. With a new Pre sident and Democra tic majority in both Houses, Roosevelt ’s 
“New Deal ” could quickly get underway.  To speed up the process, the 20th Amendment  – known as the 
Lame Duck Amendment , was passed  changing the new President ’s inau guration  to January 20th.  
 


Life during the  Great Depression  
Millions of Americans had “Depression Mentality ” which was an attitude of insec urity and economic 
concerns.  
Women  worked in order to feed and cloth their children . They  were often accused of taking away jobs 
from men. They always received lower pay than men, despite the campaign efforts from the President ’s 
wife, Eleanor Roosevelt.  
Dust Bowl Farme rs emerged in the 1930 ’s across the Great Plains due to a severe drought , high winds  
causing  topsoil ero sion, and poor farming practices. Thousands from Oklahoma (Okies) moved to 
California in search of farm work , however none was found . Joh n Steinbeck ’s The Grapes of Wrath  tells 
of such a situation.  
                 
African Americans  were always the last to be hired and the first to be fired!  
• They were excluded from state relief programs  
• They still faced racial tensions and lynching in the Southern states  
• Their Civil Rig hts leaders had no direct support from FDR  as he feared by doing so would make 
him lose  the Southern White Democratic  vote.  
• Some did work for the WPA and CCC but t hey were still segregated .  
                                           
The famous African American singer Marian Anderson was denied a singing appearance at Constitution 
Hall by the Daughters of the Revolut ion due to her color. Eleano r Roosevelt and Harold Ickes  (Secre tary 
of the Interior) bypassed th e banishment by having her sing at the Lincoln Memorial.  
Of note was that during FDR ’s New Deal, over 100 African Americ ans were appointed to middle -level 
positions in various federal departments.  


The Fair Employment Practices Commi ttee  would be  formed later in 1941  through an executive order 
to assist mino rities find jobs in the def ense industry  but it only came after the Railroad Porters Union 
threatened to march on Washin gton, D.C.   
Native Americans  were assisted during the New Deal when FDR appointed John Co llier as Commissioner 
of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. FDR mandated that federal con servation projects be put on their 
reservations  and Native American workers were to be part of various agencies i ncluding the WPA.   
The Indian Reorganiza tion (Wheeler -Howard) Act  of 1934 repealed the Dawes Act of 1887. This 
encouraged Native Americans to become farmers  and many lands were returned to tribal control. Their 
was now support to preserve their culture however several t ribal leaders  accu sed the New Deal program 
of being paternal and they refused to go along with the government ’s plans.  
Mexican Americans  were dis criminated ag ainst, especially  by white migrants moving from the Dust 
Bowl region looking for work in  the fa rmlands of California.  
 
                              
  
 
 
 
 
 


