The Great Depression (1929 -1939) 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Is it normal to have periods of surplus/recovery?  Yes 
 
2. Is it normal to have periods of recession?  Yes 
 
3. Why do you think a recession might become a depression ? Something in the business 
cycle is way off.  There might be a rapid decrease in demand or an overly large supply.  
 
Business Cycle:  An economic pattern of production and consumption.  
 
Production > Consumption ► ↑ Surplus Products ►Businesses ↓ Production & Lay Off 
Workers (THIS CAUSES A RECESSION) ►Consumers Eventually Buy Surpluses ► 
Consumption > Production ►  Businesses ↑ Production  and Hire Workers  ► Eventually 
Production > Consumption  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bull Market : 
- Stock Prices ↑ 
- Good for business!  
- People begin to Buy on Margin : 
Purchase stocks on credit with a 
loan from their broker.  Goal:  Sell 
later at a higher price, pay the 
loan back and keep the profit.   
 Bear Market : 
- Stock Prices ↓ 
- People (and businesses) lose 
new-found wealth.  
- People want to sell their 
stocks.   
- May lead to a depression  
(steep drop in economic 
activity).  
 

 
So what caused the GREAT DEPRESSION?  
 
1. Consumer Crisis:  
 
 Too many people buying on margin . 
 Companies were overproducing, but wages did 
not increase.  Banks made too many bad loans 
and investors were swindled into get -rich-quick 
schemes.  With lower demand, companies began 
to cut jobs.   
 With no money and, often, no job, no one was 
buying new pro ducts and people couldn’t repay 
their loans.  
 
Immediate Cause of the Great Depression:  The Stock Market Crash.   
This happened on October 29, 1929.  
 
2. Banking Crisis:  
 
 Banks had been heavily invested in 
stocks, too.  
 They had encouraged their customers to 
invest in stocks.  Customers couldn’t 
repay their loans.  
 Banks started to  close and people 
panicked .  They rushed to take out their 
money, creating even bigger problems  
for the banks.  
 
3. Business Crisis:  
 
 When banks closed, businesses lost 
their savings accounts. Many were left 
with no money to operate.  
 Businesses canceled plans to build 
factories and expand production.   
 They cut jobs. Unemployment rose 
drastically.   
 
 
 

The Dust Bowl  Where did it happen?  
The Great Plains  Who was affected?  
Farmers, people living on the 
Great Plains  
What was it?  
Dust Storms  
Why did it  happen?  
Long periods of drought, high 
temperatures and poor farming 
practices led to wind erosion  What effects did it have?  
400,000 farmers moved, many 
to California, and became 
migrant workers  Life during the Depression  
Based on the reading, what were 7 ways that Americans were affected by the Great 
Depression?  
1. Little or no money for food or to pay the rent. People lost their homes.  
 
2. People were frightened and miserable.  
 
3. Millions of people lost their jobs. They took any job they could get.  
 
4. People stood in “breadlines” wai ting for free bread and soup.  
 
5. Veterans marched on Washington, DC demanding the bonus that was 
promised to them.  (Bonus Army)  
 
6. Some farmers gave up farming and moved to California.  
 
7. Men and boys roamed the country living for work.  They lived in 
“Hoovervilles”: shanty towns usually on the edge of cities.  
 
 
Complete the organizer below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Roosevelt’s New Deal (p. 778 – 783) 
Read the assigned pages from the textbook.  It is very important that you pay attention to 
not only the main text, but any pictures, graphs, or primary sources in the assigned pages as 
well.  Once you have read, answer the questions and complete the  graphic organizers.  
 
1. Prior to being elected, Franklin Roosevelt (FDR) said to the country “I pledge you, I pledge 
myself, to a new deal for the American people.”  What do you think he meant by this?  
  He wants to give people new ideas and a plan for helpi ng Americans.  
  
2. Based on the document “America Tunes In” on page 779, what percentage of New Yorkers 
owned radios in 1930?  Why do you think more people owned radios in the North than in the 
South?  
 Over 50%.  
 The north had more access to electricity; more people in the north 
might have had money to buy radios, etc.  
 
3. Why did FDR rely on the Brain Trust?  
They were experts and could help him develop relief programs.  
 
4. In the speech that FDR gave at his first inauguration, what economic problems 
does he see?   Values of property have shrunken, taxes have risen, 
savings are gone, the ability to pay  has fallen, the government has a loss of 
income, no market for farmers products  
 
5. What feeling does he warn Americans of?   Fear 
 
6. What do you think the goal of his speech is?   To motivate Americans; tell them 
not to be scared, which causes inaction; to keep people moving forward  
 Franklin Delano Roosevelt  
First Inaugural Address  
March 4, 1933  
 
“… This great Nation will endure [last] as it has endured, will revive and will prosper.  So, first of all, let 
me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself – nameless, unreasoning, 
unjustified terror w hich paralyzed [stops] needed efforts to convert retreat into advance… Values of 
property have shrunken… taxes have risen; our ability to pay has fallen; government of all kinds is faced 
by serious [loss] of income… the withered leaves of industrial enterp rise lie on every side; farmers find 
no markets for their produce; the savings of many years in thousands of families are gone.  
 More important, a host of unemployed citizens face the grim problem of existence and an equally 
great number toil with little r eturn.  Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment.”  

New Deal 
Programs  Tennessee Valley Authority 
(TVA)  
Built dams to provide cheap 
electricity, set up schools and 
health centers  
 Civilian Conservation Corp 
(CCC)  
Provided jobs for young men to 
plant trees and build bridges  
Public Works Administration 
(PWA)  
Built ports, schools and aircraft 
carriers  
 National Recovery 
Administration (NRA)  
Set standards for production, 
prices and wages  
 Choose 4 New Deal programs and, in the organizer below, explain what their purpose was.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Complete the organizer below.  
 
 
 VOCABULARY TERM  DEFINITION / DESCRIPTION  
Fireside Chat  FDR’s broadcasts on the radio  
 
 
Brain Trust  FDR’s group of experts that gave him advice  
 
 
New Deal  FDR’s plan and programs to get the US out of the 
Great Depression  
 
Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC)  Guaranteed that money placed in a bank would not 
be lost if the bank failed.  
 
Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC)  A group that regulated the sale of stocks and bonds.  
Had power to punish dishonest stockbrokers.  
 

Social Security Act  
2.  Unemployment insurance  1. Set up monthly pensions for retired people  
3. Help for people with disabilities, the poor, elderly and 
children  
Read the section on pages 796 – 797 on the Social Security Act ( Help for Those in 
Need) . In the organizer below, show three thi ngs that the Social Security Act did.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRITICS OF THE NEW DEAL : 
 Some thought that the New Deal went 
too far  and that the federal government 
was getting too much power, especially 
over business.  Many wanted to continue 
the free -enterprise system.  
 
 Some thought that the New Deal  didn’t 
go far enough , and that the fede ral 
government should do more to help the 
needy and promote social reform.  
 
 Many were concerned with Roosevelt’s 
Judicial Procedures Reform Act, which 
would have allowed the President to 
appoint a new justice (up to 6) for every 
justice who did not resign  after turning 
70.   
 
 
 

 
 
DID THE NEW DEAL ACTUALLY END THE GREAT DEPRESSION?  
 
YES : Supporters say that it prevented the economic and political collapse of the US and 
created programs to help prevent future depressions.   
 
NO: Critics say that it didn’t bring the US full economic recovery.  They claim that it was 
actually World War II that ended the Depression.  
 
 
THE END OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION  
In 1939, World War II broke out in Europe.  Despite initial neutrality in the US , the economy 
began to recover as the country met the demands of war.  Production increased and 
unemployment dramatically decreased.   
 
 
 
 
 ? 

