NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES
WHATENDEDTHEGREATDEPRESSION?
Christina D. Romer
Working Paper No. 3829
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH1050 Massachusetts AvenueCambridge, MA 02138September 1991
I am grateful to BarryEichengreen,Robert Gordon, Frederic Mishkin, David Romer, and David Wilcox for helpful coiments andsuggestions. This research was supported by the National ScienceFoundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. This paper ispart of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations andFinancial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressedare those of the author and not those of the National Bureau ofEconomic Research.


NBER Working Paper #3829September 1991
WHAT ENDED THE GREAT DEPRESSION?
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the role of aggregate demand stimulus inending the Great Depression. A simple calculation indicates thatnearly all of the observed recovery of the U.S. economy prior to1942 was due to monetary expansion. Huge gold inflows in themid- and late-1930s swelled the U.S. money stock and appear tohave stimulated the economy by lowering real interest rates andencouraging investment spending and purchases of durable goods.The finding that monetary developments were crucial to therecovery implies that self-correction played little role in thegrowth of real output between 1933 and 1942.
Christina D. RomerDepartment of EconomicsUniversity of California,BerkeleyBerkeley, CA 94720and NBER


WHAT ENDEDTHE GREATDEPRESSION?
I.INTRODUCTIONBetween 1933 and 1937 real GNP in the United States grew at an averagerate of over 8 percent per year; between 1938 and 1941 it grew at an averagerate of over 10 percent per year. By any prewar or postwar metric these ratesof growth are spectacular, even for an economy pulling out of a severedepression. Yet the recovery from the collapse of 1929—1933 has receivedlittle of the recent attention that economists have lavished on the GreatDepression. Perhaps because the cataclysm of the early 1930s was so severe,modern economists have focused on the causes of the downturn and of theturning point in 1933. Once the end of the precipitous decline in output hasbeen explained, there has been a tendency to let the story drop. The eventualreturn to full employment is merely characterized as slow and incomplete untilthe outbreak of World War II.This paper examines the source of the recovery from the Great Depressionin detail. It argues that the rapid rates of growth of real output in themid— and late—1930s were largely due to conventional aggregate demandstimulus, primarily in the form of monetary expansion. My calculationssuggest that in the absence of aggregate demand stimuli the economy would haveremained depressed far longer and far more deeply than it actually did. Thisin turn suggests that any self—corrective response of the U.S. economy to lowoutput was weak or non—existent in the l930s.
A. Previous StudiesThe possibility that aggregate demand stimulus in the form of changes ingovernment spending was the source of recovery from the depression was


2analyzed extensively in the 1940s and l9SOs. Smithies asserts that "fiscalpo icy did prove to be an effective and indeed the only effective means torecovery" though his conclusion seems to be more the result of faith than ofevidence [1946, p. 12). Hansen, on the other hand, argues that fiscal policywas not used extensively in the 1930s [1941, p. 84). Brown uses aconventional Keynesian multiplier model and the concept of discretionarygovernment spending to support Hansen's view. His often—cited conclusion isthat "fiscal policy, then, seems to have been an unsuccessful recovery devicein the 'thirties —notbecause it did not work, but because it was not tried"
[1956, pp. 863—866).Friedman and Schwartz [1963) stress that Federal Reserve policy was notthe source of the recovery from the Depression either. They state: "In theperiod under consideration [1933—1941), the Federal Reserve System madeessentially no attempt to alter the quantity of high—powered money by usingeither of the two instruments which had been its major reliance up to 1933W[1963, p. 511). While they are clearly aware that other developments, inparticular New Deal gold policy, led to a rise in the money supply during themid—1930s, Friedman and Schwartz appear to be so intent on castigating theFederal Reserve for its inaction that this monetary expansion receivesrelatively little attention.The emphasis that these early scholars place on policy inaction andineffectiveness may have led modern economists to assume that conventionalaggregate demand stimulus could not have mattered in the recovery from theGreat Depression. Bernanke and Parkinson [1989] analyze the apparent trendreversion of employment in the 1930s and are struck by the strength of therecovery. They believe, however, that "the New Deal is better characterizedas having 'cleared the way' for a natural recovery ... ratherthan as being


3the engine of recovery itself" (1989, p. 212). As a result, they argue thatthe trend reversion of the interwar economy is evidence of a strong self—corrective force. De Long andSummers (1988) sound a similar theme. Theystate that "thesubstantialdegree of mean reversion by 1941 is evidence thatshocks to output are transitory." The only aggregate demand policy that theythink might have contributed to the recovery was World War II, and theyconclude that "it is hard to attribute any of the pre—1942 catch—up of the
economy to the war" [1988, p. 467].
B. OverviewDespitethis conventional wisdom, there is reason to suspect that
aggregate demand developments, particularly monetary changes, were importantin fostering the recovery from the Great Depression. This reason is thesimple but often neglected fact that Ml grew at an average rate of nearly 10percent per year between 1933 and 1937, and at an even higher rate in theearly 1940s. Such large and persistent rates of money growth wereunprecedented in U.S. economic history and thus would seem to provide apossible explanation for the unprecedented growth of real output in the mid—and late—1930s.To quantify the importance of these monetary changes and other aggregatedemand stimuli in ending the Depression, I perform a simple "back—of—the—envelope" calculation. The recessions of 1921 and 1938 are both episodes inwhich independent monetary and fiscal policy changes are typically thought tohave accounted for nearly all of the movements in real output. Thus, one canuse the experience of the economy following these policy changes to derive anestimate of the effect of changes in the government deficit and changes in themoneysupply in the interwar era. These simple policy multipliers can then be


4used to estimate the effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal developmentsin the period 1933—1937 and 1939—1942.
Such simulations suggest that monetary changes were crucially importantto the recovery, while fiscal policy had very little effect. According to thecalculations, real GNP would have been approximately 25 percent lower in 1937and nearly 50 percent lower in 1942 than it actually was had the money supplycontinued to grow at its historical average rate. I also find thatcalculations based on policy multipliers from a large macromodel yield similarconclusions.
To see if this huge estimated effect of monetary developments during therecovery phase of the Great Depression is sensible, I then look more closelyat the source of the monetary expansion in the mid— and late—1930s and at thepossible transmission mechanism for monetary developments. I find that themonetary expansion was primarily due to gold inflows, which were themselvesdue to devaluation in 1933 and to capital flight from the politicalinstability in Europe after 1935. Estimates of the cx ante real rate suggestthat, coincident with these gold inflows, real interest rates fellprecipitously in 1933 and remained low or negative throughout most of thesecond half of the 1930s. These low real interest rates are closelycorrelated with a strong rebound in interest—sensitive spending. Thus, itseems quite plausible that the expansionary monetary developments were workingthrough a conventional interest—rate transmission mechanism.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presentskey facts about the strength and timing of the recovery phase of the GreatDepression. Section 111 discusses the calculation of the effects of aggregatedemand stimulus during this period. It discusses why the 1921 and 1938experiences provide a reasonable way of estimating the effects of policy and


Sthen shows what the resulting policy multipliers imply about the importance ofpolicy in the mid— and late—1930s. Section IV discusses the source of themonetary expansion during the recovery and examines the likely transmissionmechanism for monetary developments. Finally, the conclusion summarizes theresults and suggests the importance of the findings for other analyses of theGreat Depression.
II. THE STRENGTH OF THE RECOVERY
This paper's emphasis on the source of the high rates of real growthduring the recovery from the Great Depression may seem strange to thoseaccustomed to thinking of the recovery as slow. The conventional wisdom isthat the U.S. economy remained depressed for all of the 1930s and onlyreturned to full employment following the outbreak of World War II. Theresolution of these two seemingly disparate views is that the falls in realoutput in the early 1930s. and again in 1938, were so large that it took manyyears of unprecedented growth to undo these declines and return real output tonormal.
For most of the analysis in this paper I examine annual estimates ofreal CNP from the Bureau of Economic Analysis [1986]. Because this seriesonly begins in 1929, I extend it, when necessary, with my revised version ofthe Kendrick—Kuznets CNP series (see Romer, [19881). The percentage changesin real GNP shown in Figure 1 clearly demonstrate both the enormity of thecollapse of real output between 1929 and 1933 and the strength of thesubsequent recovery. Between 1929 and 1933. real CUP declined 35 percent.Between 1933 and 1937, it rose 33 percent. In 1938 the economy sufferedanother 5 percent fall in real CUP, but this was followed by an even more


6spectacular rise in real CNP of 49 percent between 1938 and 1942. Clearly, byalmost any standard, the growth of real GNP in the four—year periods beforeand after 1938 was spectacular.On the other hand, it is also the case that despite this rapid growth,output remained substantially below normal until about 1942. A simple way toestimate trend output for the 1930s is to extrapolate the average annualgrowth rate of real GNP over the period 1923—1927 forward from 1927. Theperiod 1923—1927 is chosen for estimating normal growth because these are thefour most normal years of the 1920s: this period excludes the recession andrecovery of the early 1920s and the boom of the late 1920s. It is also a
period of price stability, suggesting that output was neither abnormally highnor abnormally low. The resulting figure for normal annual real CUP growth is3.15 percent. Figure 2 shows the log level of actual real CNP and trend CNPbased on this definition of normal growth. The graph shows that CUP was about38 percent below its trend level in 1935. In 1937, the economy was 26 percentbelow trend. Only in 1942 did the economy return to its trend path.The behavior of the unemployment series is perfectly consistent with thebehavior of the real GNP series. While many scholars have emphasized thatunemployment was still nearly 10 percent as late as 1940, it is also the casethat unemployment had dropped substantially from its high of 23 percent in1932.1 Indeed, the unemployment rate fell by more than four percentage pointsin both 1934 and 1936. The fact that unemployment did not return to its fullemployment level until 1942 simply reflects the fact that real output remainedbelow trend until that time.


7
III.THE EFFECTS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND STIMULUS IN THE RECOVERYToexamine whether aggregate demand stimulus could explain the highrates of real growth during the recovery phase of the Great Depression, Iperform an illustrative calculation. I first derive estimates of the policymultipliers, which show the effects of policy stances of a given size on realoutput. I then derive measures of the stances of monetary and fiscal policy inthe recovery. These two sets of estimates are then combined to measure theeffects of aggregate demand policy in the mid— and late—1930s.
A. Application of the Narrative Approach to the Interwar EraFramevork. Of these steps, by far the most difficult one is estimatingthe multipliers for monetary and fiscal policy. The approach that I usefocusses on two policy experiments that bracket the recoveryperiod. In 1920and 1937 there were major contractionary shifts in both monetary and fiscalpolicy. Relatively severe recessions followed each of these shifts.Furthermore, there do not appear to have been any other significant changes inthe economic environment in these years that could account for the recessions.As a result, one can decompose the percentage change in real output(relative to normal growth) in each of these two episodes into the part due tolagged monetary changes and the part due to lagged fiscal changes. That is,
(1)Output changer —pm(MotaryChange)+ flf(Fiscal Change)_1.
whereand flarethe multipliers for monetary and fiscal policy, and t iseither 1921 or 1938. Substituting in actual measures of the change in realoutput and the changes in the monetary and fiscal stances for both 1921 and1938 (the calculation of which is described in detail below) yields two


8equations In two unknowns. One can then solve this system for the monetaryand fiscal policy multipliers.To believe that 1921 and 1938 are times that provide good evidence onthe effects of policy, it is important to show that the policy changes werenot responses to movements in real output occurring for other reasons. If themonetary and fiscal changes occurred in response to declines in real output,the procedures would yield excessively large estimates of the effects ofpolicy.2 It must also be the case that there are no additional factors thataccount for the severe recessions that followed the shifts in policy. Again,if other factors were important, my procedure would overestimate the impact of
the policy changes.This method of deriving rough estimates of the effects of policy is anexample of what David Romer and I have referred to in previous work as thenarrative approach [1989 and 1990). The basic idea is that to estimate theimpact of policy, particularly of monetary policy, one often does not want touse a regression of output on the monetary policy variable or even theestimation of a big macroeconomic model of the U.S. economy. The reason forthis is that any regression procedure is likely to pick up both the effect ofmoney on output and the endogenous response of money to movements in realoutput. We argue that by using the historical record, such as informationabout the motivation of policy makers or important developments in the worldeconomy, one can identify times when policy moved for reasons unrelated to thestate of real output and times when other factors were not acting to move realoutput. Such times, we suggested, provide the clearest evidence of theeffects of policy.Independence of Policy Changes. Turning to the two policy experimentsof the interwar era, it is clear that the fiscal policy change in 1920 was not


9caused by developments in the real economy: it was the end of World War Ithat led to an enormous drop in real government spending. The magnitude ofthischange can be seen in the fact that the surplus to GNP ratio rose from —8.3 percentin 1919 to 0.5 percentin 1920.Themonetary policy change inthis episode was also quite pronounced andlargelyindependent. According to Friedman and Schwartz, the Federal Reservein 1919 became concerned about the lingering inflation from World War I andthe postwar boom [1963, pp. 221—239]. In response, the Federal Reserve raisedthe discount rate 3/4 of a percentage point in December 1919. The diaries andpapers of members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System thatFriedman and Schwartz analyze suggest that the Federal Reserve did notunderstand the lags with which monetary policy operated. As a result, whenthe economy failed to respond immediately to the increase in interest rates,the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate another 1 1/4 percentage pointsin January 1920 and 1 percentage point more in June 1920. Because theseenormous rises in interest rates appear to be mainly the result of Federal
Reserve inexperience, they represent independent monetary developments ratherthan a conscious response to the current state of the real economy.In 1937 the tightening of fiscal policy was less dramatic, but stillquite severe. In 1936 a large bonus had been paid to veterans of World War Iand this resulted in a surge in government spending. In 1937 not only wasthis surge removed, but social security taxes were collected for the firsttime. This increase in revenues in 1937 is clearly unrelated to developmentsin the real economy; itreflectsa conscious decision to permanently raisetaxes to finance a pension system. The result of these two changes was thatthe surplus to GNP ratio rose from —4.4 percent in 1936 to —2.2 percent in1937.


10The monetary changes in 1937 were less straightforward than those in1920, but still largely independent. Friedman and Schwartz view the mainmonetary shock as the result of the doubling of reserve requirements in threesteps between July 1936 and May 1937 [1963, pp. 543—5451. The Federal Reserveraised reserve requirements because they were concerned about the high levelof excess reserves in 1936 and wanted to turn excess reserves into requiredreserves. According to Friedman and Schwartz, this action greatly decreasedthe money supply because banks wanted to hold excess reserves. As a result,they decreased lending so that reserves were still higher than the newrequired levels.Friedman and Schwartz view the resulting change in the money supply asindependent because the Federal Reserve was not responding to the real
economy; they inadvertently contracted the money supply because theymisunderstood the motivation of bankers. Further evidence that thecontraction of the money supply was not a conscious decision by the FederalReserve to respond to the real economy is provided by the Minutes of theFederal Open Market Committee for 1937. At numerous FOMC meetings, theChairman of the Board of Governors, Mariner Eccies, insisted that the doublingof reserve requirements did not constitute an end to the policy of easy money(see, for example, the Minutes for the meetings of March 13 and 15, 1937).Clearly, the Federal Reserve was not deliberately contracting the money supplyin anticipation of future declines in output.In addition to this change in reserve requirements, the Treasury in 1936began sterilizing gold inflows. This resulted in a substantial slowing in thegrowth rate, though not an actual decline, in the stock of high—powered money.This switch to sterilization appears to be part of the same policy mistakethat led to the increase in reserve requirements. According to Chandler, the


11Treasury undertook the sterilization at the behest of the Federal Reservewhich feared that unsterilized gold inflows would exacerbate the excessreserves problem [1970, pp. 177—181). Evidence that the Treasury did not meanto affect the money supply is provided by the fact that they were greatlyconcerned by the resulting rise in interest rates in 1937.The Role of Additional Factors. In addition to this evidence that themonetary and fiscal changes in 1920 and 1937 were independent of the realeconomy, there is also no direct evidence that any factor other than monetaryand fiscal policy were important sources of the falls in output in 1921 and1938. Scholars who have studied the 1921 and 1938 recessions almost all viewthe policy changes as crucial. Friedman and Schwartz, for example, attributeboth downturns almost entirely to monetary developments. They state: "in1920—21 and 1937—38, the decline in the money stock was a consequence ofpolicy actions of the Federal Reserve System .... Inboth cases thesubsequent decline in the money stock was associated with a severe economicdecline" [1963, p. 678]. This emphasis on monetary factors in 1921 and 1938
is echoed by Lewis [1949, pp. 19—20) and Roose [1954, p. 239].Other authors assign a much more important role to fiscal policy as thesource of these two interwar downturns. Hansen (1938], Smithies [1946), andCordon [1974] all attribute the recession of 1938 to the decline in governmentspending. Ayres writes of the decline in government expenditures that "itseems wholly probable that we have here the chief explanation of theexceptionally abrupt decline in business activity which took place in theautumn of 1937" (1939, p. 1521. Gordon also argues that the decline ingovernment spending after World War I was an important source of the 1921downturn. He states: "by the beginning of 1920 government finance had cometo exercise a strong deflationary force on the economy" [1974, p. 20].


12Perhaps more important evidence that policy changes were the main shocksaffecting the U.S. economy in the downturns of 1921 and 1938 is provided bythe fact that the few alternative explanations that have been advanced areeasily disproved. The policy hypotheses, in contrast, are completelyconsistent with the behavior of major economic variables. For example, onealternative explanation for the downturn in 1938 is that increases in wagesdue to increased unionization decreased output and investment; in short, therewas an adverse supply shock in 1937 (see, for example, Roose [1954, p. 239]).The main problem with this story is that an adverse supply shock should beaccompanied by rising prices and this did not occur: between 1937 and 1938wholesale prices fell 9.4 percent. The policy hypotheses that stress a fallin aggregate demand are consistent with the observed fall in prices. Themonetary explanation is also consistent with the fact that interest rates rosesharply in early 1937 and interest—sensitive spending such as constructionexpenditures plummeted in late 1937.The main alternative explanation advanced for the recession of 1921 isthat following World War I there was tremendous pent—up demand for consumergoods. By 1920, the story goes, this demand had been satisfied and firmsfaced a dramatic decline in sales (see, for example, Lewis [1949, p. 19]).The problem with this story is that consumption actually rose quitesubstantially in both 1920 and 1921. Real consumer expenditures rose 4.8percent between 1919 and 1920 and 6.2 percent between 1920 and l92l. Anyspending story also faces conflict from the fact that interest rates rosesubstantially in 1920.'
B. Policy Multipliers
The independence of policy movements in 1920 and 1937 and the absence


13of additional causes of the recessions of 1921 and 1938 suggest that these twoepisodes can be used to estimate multipliers for monetary and fiscal policy.To actually do this calculation, one merely substitutes the relevant data for1921 and 1938 into equation (1) and then solves the two equation system for
and fl.Outputand Folicy Measures. In applying the framework of equation (1) 1use as the measure of output change the deviation of the growth rate of realCNP from its usual growth rate. As described previously, I define usualoutput growth as the average annual growth rate in the period 1923—1927. Forthe monetary and fiscal policy variables I then use measures that compare thepolicy action in a given year to the usual, long—run value of that policy. Inessence, I assume that there is some usual policy stance that would keepaggregate demand and real output growing at its trend rate. Only deviationsof monetary and fiscal policy from their normal stances would result in ashift in aggregate demand and hence in a deviation of real output growth from
normal.For the monetary policy variable I use the deviation of the annual(December to December) growth rate of Ml from its usual growth rate, whereusual is again defined as the average annual growth rate between 1923 andl927. This definition of the usual growth rate of money is sensible becausethe period 1923—1927 was characterized by constant prices and steady CNPgrowth. Thus, monetary policy can be seen as basically holding aggregatedemand steady relative to CNP in these years. The average annual growth rateof Ml over this period was 2.88 percent. Looking at monetary growth relativeto this norm can provide an indication of whether monetary developments wereworking to shift the aggregate demand curve in either a positive or negativedirection.6


14For the fiscal policy variable I use the annual change in the realfederal surplus to real CNP ratio.7 This measure of fiscal policy takes asnormal essentially no change in the real federal surplus. This makes sense asa measure of normal policy because a constant deficit or surplus should leave
aggregate demand unchanged (except for balanced budget multiplier effects).8In describing the framework for calculating multipliers, I assumed thatthe policy variables affect output with a one—year lag. While this is a crudeassumption, for the two episodes in question it is surely reasonable. Inannual data the main falls in real output In these episodes occur between 1920and 1921 and between 1937 and 1938. The main monetary and fiscal policymovements in each episode, however, occur in the year before the largedeclines in real output. Indeed, the contemporaneous policy movements aretypically slightly expansionary in each episode. Thus the only way to derivesensible multipliers is to assume a one—year lag.Results. Substituting the actual data on the departure of real GNPgrowth from usual and the lagged policy measures into (1) for both 1921 and1938 yields an estimated multiplier for monetary policy of 0.823 and anestimated multiplier for fiscal policy of —0.233. The signs of the twomultipliers are what one would expect. is negative because the fiscalpolicy variable is based on the federal surplus; an increase in the fiscalpolicy measure is contractionary.The magnitude of the monetary policy multiplier is quite reasonable. Itimplies that a growth rate of Ml that is 1 percentage point lower than normalresults in real output growth that is 0.82 percentage points lower thannormal. As described in more detail below, this is quite consistent with theeffects of monetary developments found in large macromodels.The magnitude of the fiscal policy multiplier is quite small. It


15implies that a rise in the surplus to GNP ratio of 1 percentage point lowersthe growth rate of real output relative to usual by 0.23 percentage points.The source of this small fiscal policy multiplier is the fact that thedeviation of real output growth from normal was slightly smaller in 1921 thanin 1938, but the fiscal policy shock was nearly four times as large in 1920 asIn 1937. As a result, it is very difficult to attribute most of the declinesin output in 1921 and 1938 to fiscal policy. I show below, however, that evenvery large changes in the estimated fiscal policy multiplier would have onlysmall effects on the conclusions that follow.
C. SimulationsArmed with these multipliers, it is possible to calculate the likelyeffects of monetary and fiscal developments during the mid— and late—1930s.As I have set up the analysis, the multiplier times the policy measure laggedone year shows the effect of policy on the deviation of output growth fromnormal in a given year. If one subtracts this effect of unusual policy fromthe actual growth rate of real output, one is left with a series on what thegrowth rate of output would have been under normal policy. Accumulating thesegrowth rates of real output under normal policy and then adding them to thelevel of output starting in some base year yields a series on the level of
output under normal policy.The difference between the path of actual output and the path of outputunder normal policy shows how much slower the recovery would have been in theabsence of expansionary policy. In calculating the path of real output undernormal policy I use 1933 as the base year. This path shows what output wouldhave done starting in 1933 under normal policy, without taking into accountthe fact that the depression was probably caused to a large extent by extreme


16policy mistakes. This is appropriate because the purpose of this paper is notto argue that policy did not contribute to the downturn of the early 1930s,but rather that policy was central to the recovery in the mid— and late—1930s.In calculating the effects of unusual policy, I do the analysis separately formonetary and fiscal policy. In one experiment I ask what would output havebeen if fiscal policy had been held at its usual level, but monetary policywas as it actually was. In another, I hold monetary policy to its normallevel, and let fiscal policy be equal to its actual value.Fiscal Policy. Figure 3 shows the experiment for fiscal policy. Thedashed line shows the path of log output under the assumption that fiscalpolicy was at its usual level throughout the mid— and late—1930s; the solidline shows the path of actual log output. The great similarity of the twolines indicates that unusual fiscal policy contributed almost nothing to therecovery from the Great Depression. Only in 1942 is there a noticeabledifference between actual output and output under normal fiscal policy, andeven then this difference is small.The small estimated effect of fiscal policy obviously stems in part fromthe fact that the calculation based on 1921 and 1938 yields a small estimatedmultiplier for fiscal policy. However, it is more fundamentally due to thefact that the deviation of fiscal policy from normal was not large during the1930s. This fact can be seen in Figure 4, which shows the change in thesurplus to CNP ratio (lagged one year). The change in the federal surplus toGNP ratio in the mid—l930s was typically less than one percentage point, andwas actually positive in some years. Even in 1941, the first year of asubstantial wartime increase in spending, the surplus to GNP ratio onlyincreased by 6 percentage points.Monetary Policy. Figure 5 shows the experiment for monetary policy.


17The dashed line now shows the path of log output under the assumption that themoney growth rate was held to its usual pre—Depression level throughout themid— and late—1930s; the solid line shows the path of actual log output. Thistime the two paths are tremendously different. The differencein the twopaths indicates that had the money growth rate been held to its usual level inthe mid—l930s, real GNP in 1937 would have been nearly 25 percent lower thanit actually was. By 1942, the difference between CNP under normal and actual
monetary policy grows to nearly 50 percent. These calculations suggest thatmonetary developments were critical to the recovery from the Great Depression.Had money growth been held to its normal level, the U.S. economy in 1942 wouldhave been 50 percent below its pre—Depression trend path, rather than back to
normal output.9The source of this large estimated effect of monetary developments isnot hard to find. As described above, the monetary policy multiplierestimated from 1921 and 1938 is of roughly the magnitude that is found inpostwar macromodels. Therefore, the large estimated effect of monetarydevelopments is not due to an implausibly large multiplier for monetarypolicy. Rather the large estimated effects are due to the extraordinary ratesof money growth in the mid— and late—1930s. The monetary policy variable(lagged one year) is graphed in Figure 6. As can be seen, the deviations ofthe money growth rate from normal were enormous in the mid— and late—1930s.For most years this deviation was over 10 percent. Hence, it is not at allsurprising to find that had this deviation from normal been held at zero, therecovery from the Depression would have been dramatically slower.
D. RobustnessThe results of these simulations are quite robust. The stance of


18monetary policy was so expansionary during the recovery, and the stance offiscal policy was so non—expansionary, that changing the multipliers evensubstantially would not make monetary policy unimportant and fiscal policycrucial.One way to see this is to imagine cutting the monetary policy multiplierin half and doubling the fiscal policy multiplier.10 This change represents avery extreme change in the monetary policy multiplier. Nevertheless, thisreduction in the multiplier only implies that in 1942 real GNP would have beenroughly 25 percent lower than it actually was had monetary policy been held toits usual level during the mid— and late—1930s. This result still suggeststhat aggregate demand stimulus in the forii of monetary policy was crucial tothe recovery. In the case of fiscal policy, doubling the policy multiplierwould lead to the conclusion that real GNP in 1942 would have been 3 percentlower in 1942 had the change in the surplus to GNP ratio been held to zero.This increases the apparent role of fiscal policy, but not dramatically so.11Another way to evaluate the robustness of the calculations is to usepolicy multipliers derived from the estimation of a postwar macromodel. TheMPS model is the main forecasting model currently used by the Federal ReserveBoard and is generally thought to be based both on good economic theory andcareful data analysis. In this model, the short—run multiplier for monetarypolicy is 1.2; that is, a one—time increase in Ml above the baselineprojection of 1 percentage point results in real CNP growth over the next fourquarters that is 1.2 percentage points above the baseline projection. Thisshort—run multiplier for monetary policy is slightly larger than themultiplier derived from the 1921 and 1938 episodes. The short—run multiplierfor fiscal policy in the MPS model is roughly —2.13; a decrease in the surplusto CNP ratio of 1 percentage point results in real QNP growth over the next


four quarters that is 2.13 percentage points above the baseline projection.This multiplier for fiscal policy is roughly 10 times larger than that derived
from the 1921 and 1938 episodes.12Using the multipliers from the MPS model in place of those derived frommy calculation does not change the conclusions appreciably. Substituting inthe short—run MPS multiplier for monetary policy increases the apparentimportance of monetary policy: real GNP in 1942 would have been roughly 70percent lower than it actually was had monetary policy been held to its usualcourse. Using the much larger MPS multiplier for fiscal policy clearlyincreases the role for fiscal policy, but not dramatically so. According tothis simulation, if fiscal policy had been held to its usual level, real GNPin 1942 would have been 14 percent lower than it actually was. However,essentially all of this effect comes from the last year of the simulation:real GNP in 1941 would have only been 1 percent lower than it actually was iffiscal policy had been held to its usual level. Even with the much largermultiplier, fiscal policy accounts for essentially none of the recovery priorto 1942. Thus, using policy multipliers derived from a much differentprocedure than I used in my calculation leads to the same conclusion thatmonetary policy was crucial to the recovery from the Great Depression andfiscal policy was of little importance.'3One characteristic of most multipliers derived from large rnacromodels isthat the effects of aggregate demand policy on the level of real output areconstrained to be zero in the long run. This is certainly the case in the MPSmodel in which the long—run behavior of the economy is assunied to follow thepredictions of a Solow growth model. In the simulations that I have done.both with my own multipliers and with those from the MPS model, I have notfollowed this practice. I have only considered the short—run multipliers and


20have not forced the positive effects of an expansionary aggregate demand shockon the level of real output to be undone eventually. I do this because theconstraint that the long—run effects of policy are zero is simply imposed apriori in most models; what evidence there is in fact indicates that the realeffects of policy shifts are highly persistent (see, for example, Romer andRosier [1989]).However, provided that one does not assume that the positive effects ofexpansionary policy are undone very quickly (that is, within a year or two),allowing for negative feedback effects from a policy stimulus would not negatethe crucial role of policy in generating the high real growth rates observedin the mid— and late—1930s. This is true both because in the first few yearsof the expansion there would be no negative feedback effects from previouspolicy expansions and because there are progressively larger monetary growthrates toward the end of the recovery. Furthermore, there is no support forthe view that the effects of policy shifts are counteracted rapidly. In theMPS model, for example, the effects of both fiscal and monetary shocks do notstart to be counteracted substantially until 12 quarters after the shock.Thus, even under the assumption that policy does not matter in the long run,one would still find that policy was important for the 8 to 10 years thatencompass the recovery phase of the Great Depression.
IV. THE SOURCE OF THE MONETARY EXPANSION AND THE TRANSMISSION MECHANISM
That economic developments would have been very different in the mid—and late—1930s had money growth been held to its usual level is obvious fromthe calculations above. However, to say that it would have been a disaster tohold money growth rates at their usual level in the second half of the 1930s


21is different from saying that monetary policy developments caused the recoverywe observe. The evidence presented thus far does not rule out the possibilitythat money growth rates were high relative to usual because of an endogenousresponse of money growth to the rapid recovery of real output. Hence, inorder to argue that it was aggregate demand stimulus that caused the recoveryrather than self—correction, one must check that the rapid rates of monetarygrowth were due to policy actions or historical accidents, and were not the
result of higher output bringing forth money creation.14Furthermore, before one believes that even a huge independent monetaryexpansion had the enormous effect that my simulations suggest that it had, itis reasonable to consider the possible transmission mechanism. Therefore, Ialso check whether there is an identifiable way in which the rapid growthrates in the money supply in the mid— and late—1930s could have stimulated the
real economy.
A. Monetary ExpansionMoney Multiplier. It is fairly easy to find evidence that the monetaryexpansion of the mid— and late—1930s could not have been endogenous. The main
way that the money supply might grow endogenously is through changes in thelending activities of banks. It is usually argued that in response to a boom,banks may raise the deposit to reserve ratio and customers may accept a higherdeposit to currency ratio. Both of these changes Imply that a given supply ofhigh—powered money can then support a larger stock of Ml. However, neither ofthese conditions were satisfied during the recovery from the Great Depression.The deposit to reserve ratio fell steadily in the mid— and late 1930s, from8.86 in January 1933 to 6.67 in December 1942. The deposit to currency ratiorose initially in the recovery as the banking system regained credibility, but


22then remained fairly constant from 1935 until 1941. In late 1941 and 1942,this ratio then fell quite sharply.1 The behavior of both these ratiossuggests that it could not be the case that the money supply rose in the mid—and late—1930s because of demand—induced changes in the money multiplier.The Rise in High-Powered Money. Since the money multiplier, ifanything, fell during the recovery from the Great Depression, it is clear thatany rise observed in Ml must have been due to a rise in the stock of high—powered money. And indeed, the stock of high—powered money rose substantiallymore than the stock of Ml. It is theoretically possible that this rise in
high—powered money was endogenous, occurring because the monetary authorityincreased the money supply to accommodate the higher transactions demandcaused by higher output. In truth, however, Federal Reserve monetary policywas far from accommodating. Essentially none of the increases in the stock ofhigh—powered money during the second half of the Great Depression were due toactive Federal Reserve policy. The Federal Reserve maintained a policy ofcaution throughout the recovery and even stopped increasing Federal Reservecredit to meet seasonal demands in the mid— and late—1930s (see Friedman andSchwartz [1963, pp. 511—514]). Thus, there is no evidence that high—poweredmoney increased in response to the increase in real output.The source of the huge increases in the U.S. money supply during therecovery were the tremendous gold inflows that began in 1933. Friedman andSchwartz state: "the money stock grew at a rapid rate in the three successiveyears from June 1933 to June 1936 .... Therapid rise was a consequence ofthe gold inflow produced by the revaluation of gold plus the flight of capitalto the United States. It was in no way a consequence of the contemporaneousbusiness expansion" [1963, p. 5441. The monetary gold stock nearly doubledbetween December 1933 and July 1934 and then increased at an average annual


23rate of nearly 15 percent between December 1934 and December 1941.18The above quotation indicates that Friedman and Schwartz believe quitereasonably that the tremendous initial rise in gold inflows in 1934 was theresult of the significant revaluation of gold that became official on January31, 1934 [1963, p. 508—509]. In this way a large part of the rise was theresult of an active policy decision on the part of the Rooseveltadministration. Bloomfield reiterates this conclusion saying that "thedevaluation of the dollar, for technical reasons, was also the direct cause ofmuch of the heavy net gold imports of $758 million in February—March, 1934;for it created a marked 'gap' ... betweenthe prices of gold in the UnitedStates and in foreign countries and thereby induced large—scale gold importson an arbitrage basis until that 'gap' was finally wiped out" (1950, p. 142).Both Bloomfield and Friedman and Schwartz attribute most of thecontinuing increases in gold throughout the later l930s to politicaldevelopments in Europe. Bloomfield points out that the gold inflows wereprimarily caused by huge net imports of foreign capital to the U.S; the U.S.ran persistent and large capital account surpluses in the mid— and late—19305.17 He then states: "Probably the most important single cause of themassive movement of funds to the United States in 1934—39 as a whole was therapid deterioration in the international political situation. The growingthreat of a European war created fears of seizure or destruction of wealth bythe enemy, imposition of exchange restrictions, oppressive war taxation .
Hugevolumes of funds were consequently transferred in panic to the UnitedStates from Western European countries likely to be involved in such aconflict" (1950, pp. 24—25). Friedman and Schwartz are more succinct whenthey conclude: "Munich and the outbreak of war in Europe were the main factorsdetermining the U.S. money stock in those years (1938—19411, as Hitler and the


24gold miners had been in 1934 to 1936" (1963. P. 545).Roosevelt's Gold Policy. Given that unsterilized gold inflows were thesource of the monetary expansion of the mid— and late—l930s, it is importantto analyze why the Roosevelt administration devalued in 1933 and why theTreasury did not sterilize the gold inflows during most of the recoveryperiod. If these decisions were prompted by the recovery itself, then themonetary expansion could, at some level, be considered endogenous. This,however, is almost surely not true.Johnson's [1939) analysis of the Roosevelt administration's gold policysuggests that to the extent that the Treasury was responding to the real.economy, it was trying to counteract the Depression through easy money, ratherthan trying to accommodate the recovery. That is, the administration was, ifanything, seeking to increase the money supply because output was low, notbecause output was high or growing. Johnson stresses that Roosevelt's desireto encourage a gold inflow was not based on a conventional view of themonetary transmission mechanism, but rather on the view that an increase inthe gold supply would directly raise prices and reflation would directlystimulate recovery [1939, pp. 9—28].The fact that the continuing gold inflows of the mid—l930s were notsterilized appears to be partly the result of technical problems with thesterilization process. The Gold Reserve Act of 1934 set up a stabilizationfund and made explicit the role of the Treasury in intervening in the foreignexchange market. However, because the stabilization fund was endowed onlywith gold, it was technically able to only counteract gold outflows, not goldinflows (see Johnson (1939, pp. 92—114)). As a result, sterilization wouldhave required an active decision to change the new operating procedures. Sucha decision was not made because Roosevelt believed that -unsterilized gold


25inflows would stimulate the economy through reflation.This discussion of gold policy during the recovery suggests that thedevaluation and the absence of sterilization were the result of active policydecisions and a lack of understanding about the process of exchange marketintervention. To the degree that active policy was involved, it was clearlypolicy aimed at encouraging recovery, not policy responding to a recovery thatwas already under way. Together with the discussion of the role of politicalinstability in causing gold flows, these findings make it clear that theincrease in the money supply in the recovery phase of the Great Depression wasnot endogenous. Since the simulation results of Section III showed that thelarge deviations of money growth rates from normal appear to account for muchof the recovery of real output between 1933 and 1937 and between 1938 and1942, it is possible to conclude that independent monetary developmentsaccount for the bulk of the recovery from the Great Depression.
B. Transmission MechanismThe usual way that loose monetary policy is thought to affect realoutput is through real interest rates: an increase in the money growth ratelowers real interest rates, and this in turn stimulates interest—sensitive
spending by lowering the cost of borrowing or by reducing the opportunity costof spending. To see if this usual mechanism could have been operating in thesecond half of the 1930s, it is necessary to look at the behavior of interestrates and interest—sensitive spending.Interest Rates. Nominal interest rates declined around the same timethat money growth expanded rapidly. For example, the commercial paper ratedropped from 2.63 percent to 1.25 percent between the second and fourthquarters of l933.j However, in an environment where prices are changing


26rapidly, nominal interest rates are clearly not the best indicator of the costof borrowing. Rather, one wants to consider the behavior of real interestrates. This is especially true given the fact that nominal interest rateswere close to zero by 1934. Clearly if monetary developments affected realrates substantially in this period, it must have been through expectedinflation, not through further declines in nominal rates.The simplest way to estimate real interest rates Is to consider the cxpost real rate. To calculate cx post real rates I use quarterly data on the 4to 6 month commercial paper rate and subtract off the actual change in theproducer price index over the following quarter (at an annual rate).19 Thenominal commercial paper rate and the ex post real rate are graphed in Figure7. The figure shows that ex post real rates dropped precipitously at thestart of the monetary expansion in 1933 and remained low or negative for therest of the decade (except for the rise during the monetary contraction of1937—1938). Indeed, the drop in cx post real rates between the contractionaryand expansionary phases of the Great Depression is remarkable. Ex post realrates fell from values over 15 percent in the early 1930s to values typicallyaround —10 percent in the inid—l930s and early 1940s. That nominal interestrates were close to zero during most of this period emphasizes the fact thatinflation was quite significant starting in 1933.20While the behavior of the ex post real rate is suggestive that theinterest—rate transmission mechanism could have been working in the recoveryphase of the Great Depression, it is the ex ante real rate that is actuallyrelevant for decision making. To estimate cx ante real interest rates I
employ the simple regression procedure suggested by Mishkin [1981].Manipulation of the Fisher identity shows that the difference between the cxante real rate that we want to know and the cx post real rate that we observe


27is unanticipated inflation. Under the assumption ofrational expectations,the expectation of unanticipated inflation using information available at thetimethe forecast is made is zero. Therefore, if one regresses the ex postreal rate on current and lagged information, the fitted values provideestimates of the ex ante real rate. This is true because the expectation ofboth the OLS error term and unanticipated inflation are zero.To apply this procedure 1 regress the ex post real rates calculatedabove on a variety of contemporaneous and lagged variables. In particular, Iinclude in the regression the current value and four quarterly lags of themonetary policy variable described in the multiplier calculations <but
disaggregated to quarterly values), the percentage change in industrialproduction, actual inflation, and the level of the nominal commercial paperrate. To account for possible seasonal variation I also include a constantterm and three quarterly dummy variables. This regression is run over thesample period 1923 to 1942.21The results of this regression are shown in Table 1. The includedexplanatory variables explain a substantial fraction of the total variation inthe cx post real interest rate; the R2 of the regression is 0.52. Of theindividual explanatory variables, the one of most interest is the monetarypolicy variable. Obviously, if the conventional transmission mechanism isoperating, the monetary policy variable should enter with a significantnegative coefficient. As can be seen, this is clearly the case. The firstlagof the monetary policy variable enters the regression with a coefficientof —0.463 and has a t—statistic of —3.02. This suggests that on average inthe interwar sample period monetary developments had a substantial negativecorrelation with real interest rates.The fitted values of this regression are graphed in Figure 8. As


28described before, these fitted values provide an estimate of the ex ante realrate. These estimates of the real rate show the same marked drop that the expost real rate showed, and the drop is again nearly contemporaneous with theswitch to expansionary monetary policy in 1933.22 While one cannot be surethat actual real rates dropped the same amount as these estimates or that the
drop was caused by monetary developments, the regression results certainlysuggest that the expansionary monetary developments of the mid— and late—1930sdid have a substantial impact on real interest rates. Thus, this aspect ofthe conventional monetary transmission mechanism appears to be operating inthe recovery phase of the Great Depression.Response of Interest-Sensitive Spending. For expansionary monetarydevelopments to have stimulated the economy in the mid— and late—1930s, itmust be the case that real interest rates not only fell, but that investmentand other types of interest—sensitive spending also responded positively tothis drop in real interest rates. While a detailed investigation of thedeterminants of investment and consumption is clearly outside the scope ofthis paper, it is important to see if the gross movements in these seriessuggest that the conventional monetary transmission mechanism could have beenoperating in the mid— and late—1930s.Figures 9 and 10 graph the annual percentage change in real total fixedinvestment and in real consumer expenditures on durable goods.23 In bothfigures the annual average of the estimates of the ex ante real interest rateare also graphed. These graphs suggest that there is a very strong negativerelationship between real interest rates and the percentage change ininterest—sensitive spending in the mid— and late—1930s. Fixed investment andthe consumption of durable goods both turned up shortly after the plunge inreal rates in 1933. Over the next several years real rates remained negative


29and spending grew rapidly. In 1938 the recovery was interrupted as real ratesturned substantially positive and spending fell sharply. Starting in 1939real rates fell again and the rapid growth of spending resumed.The relationship between spending and interest rates can be quantifiedby computing the correlations between the percentage change in fixedinvestment or consumer spending on durables and the level of the ex ante realrate. Table 2 shows these correlations, which are estimated over the period1934—1942. The table shows that there is a very strong contemporaneouscorrelation between interest rates and the growth rates of investment andconsumer spending on durable goods in the recovery phase of the GreatDepression. There is also a reasonably strong correlation between thepercentage change in spending and interest rates lagged one year.This same relationship also holds with the available quarterly series onconstruction contracts. These data show the floor space of new buildings forwhich construction contracts have been drawn up during the quarter.24 This isa series that one might, reasonably expect to respond quickly to movements ininterest rates because it refers to planned rather than actual expenditures.And indeed, over the period 1933—1942, the contemporaneous correlation betweenthe percentage change in construction contracts and the ex ante real rate is—O.4. The low interest rates of the mid—1930s and the early—1940scorrespond to periods of rapid increase in construction contracts.These correlations obviously do not prove that the fall in interestrates caused the surge in investment and durable goods expenditures. However,they do at least suggest that there is no evidence that the conventionaltransmission mechanism for monetary developments failed to operate during themid— and late—1930s. One piece of evidence that suggests more of a causallink between the fall in interest rates and the recovery is the difference in


30
the timing of the rebound in consumer expenditures on durables and onservices. Whereas consumer expenditures on durables Increased between 1933and 1934, real consumer expenditures on services did not turn around until1935. This suggests that it was not a surge of optimism that was pulling upall types of consumer expenditures in 1934, but rather some force, such as afall in interest rates, that was operating primarily on durable goods.25
V. CONCLUSIONThe main finding of this study is that monetary developments were acrucial source of the recovery of the U.S. economy from the Great Depression.The very rapid growth of the money supply beginning in 1933 appears to havelowered real interest rates and stimulated investment spending just asconventional models of the transmission mechanism would predict.These expansionary monetary developments were almost surely independent,in the sense that the money supply increased for reasons unrelated to thegrowth of real output. However, whether the expansion should be attributed togood luck or good policy is more debatable. The money supply grew rapidly inthe mid— and late—1930s primarily because huge gold inflows to the U.S. wentunsterilized. While the later gold flows were mainly due to political
developments in Europe, the largest gold inflows occurred immediatelyfollowing the revaluation of gold mandated by the Roosevelt administration in1934. Thus, the gold flows were partly due to historical accident and partlydue to policy. The decision to let the gold flows swell the U.S. money supplywas also at least partly a policy choice. The Roosevelt administration chosenot to sterilize the gold flows because they hoped that such flows wouldstimulate the depressed U.S. economy.


31The finding that monetary developments were very important and fiscalpolicy was of little consequence in the mid— and late—1930s suggests aninteresting twist on the usual view that World War II was important in causingor accelerating the recovery from the Great Depression. As mentioned above,even in 1942, the year that the economy returned to its trend path, theeffects of fiscal policy were small. As a result, it is hard to argue thatthe changes in government spending caused by the war were a major factor inthe recovery; the recovery was nearly complete before the war had a noticeable
fiscal impact.However, Bloomfield's and Friedman and Schwartz's analysis of the causeof the gold inflows that raised the U.S. money supply actually suggest adirect link from the war to the money supply. The U.S. money supply startedto rise in 1938 because of capital flight from Europe caused by Hitler's
increasing belligerence; the resulting gold inflows increased dramaticallyafter war was officially declared in Europe. In this way the war may have
been quite important in keeping the U.S. money supply growing rapidly after1938. This could obviously have contributed substantially to the recovery asearly as 1939. Thus, World War II may have helped to end the Great Depressionin the U.S., but its expansionary benefits worked initially through monetary
developments rather than through fiscal policy.The finding that monetary developments were crucial to the recoveryconfirms some other views of the end of the Great Depression. Most obviously,it supports Friedman and Schwartz's view that monetary developments were in
general very important during the depression. It suggests, however, thatFriedman and Schwartz's emphasis on the inaction of the Federal Reserve after1933 was misplaced. What mattered was that the money supply grew rapidly;that this rise was orchestrated by the Treasury rather than the Federal


32Reserve is of secondary importance.The paper is also supportive of studies that emphasize the devaluationof 1933—1934 as the engine of recovery. Temin [1989] argues that thedevaluation signalled the end of a deflationary monetary regime and that thischange in regime was crucial to improving expectations. In this story it wasthe change in expectations that brought about the turning point in 1933. Mywork bolsters Temins argument by showing that the deflationary regime was
indeed replaced by a very inflationary monetary policy. Thus, it may explainwhy the regime shift was viewed as credible. More importantly, it explainswhy the initial recovery was followed by continued rapid expansion. Withoutactual inflation and actual declines in real interest rates, the recoverystimulated by a change in expectations would almost surely have been short—lived. In the same way, this paper also bolsters the argument of Eichengreenand Sachs [1985] that devaluation could stimulate recovery by allowingexpansionary monetary policy. It shows that in the case of the U.S.devaluation was indeed followed by salutary increases in the money supply.On the other hand, the results here appear to contradict studies, suchas Bernanke and Parkinson [1989] and De Long and Summers [1988], that suggestthat the recovery from the Great Depression was due to the self—correctivepowers of the U.S. economy in the 1930s. My finding is that aggregate demandstimulus was the main source of the recovery from the Great Depression. Thesimulations suggest that without the tremendous increases in the money supply,the economy would still have been approximately 50 percent below its pre—Depression trend level in 1942, rather than back to full employment as itactually was. This certainly seems to suggest that the self—corrective powerof the U.S. economy in the l930s was very weak. Thus, the Great Depressiondoes not seem to provide evidence that large shocks are rapidly undone by the


33forces of mean reversion. Rather, it suggests that large negative shifts inaggregate demand are sometimes followed by large positive shifts, thecombination of which leaves the economy back on trend.


34REFERENCES
Ayres, Leonard P. Turning Points in Business Cycles. New York: Macmillan,1939.Bernanke, Ben S. "Nonxnonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in thePropagationof the Great Depression." American Economic Review 73 (June1983): 257—276.Bernanke, Ben S. and Martin S. Parkinson. "Unemployment, Inflation, and Wagesin the American Depression: Are There Lessons for Europe?" AmericanEconomic Review 79 (May 1989): 210—214.Bloomfield, Arthur I. Capital Imports and the American Balance of Payments.1934—39. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1950.Brown, E. Cary. "Fiscal Policy in the 'Thirties: A Reappraisal." AmericanEconomic Review 46 (December 1956): 857—879.Chandler, Lester V. America's Greatest Depression. 1929—1941. New York:Harper and Row, 1970.Darby, Michael. "Three—and—a—half Million U.S. Employees Have Been Mislaid:Or, an Explanation of Unemployment 1934—1941." Journal of PoliticalEconomy 84 (February 1976): 1—16.De Long, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers. "How Does Macroeconomic PolicyAffect Output?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1988:2): 433—480.Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. "Exchange Rates and Economic Recoveryin the 1930s." Journal of Economic History 45 (December 1985): 925—946.Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the UnitedStates. 1867—1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.Gordon, Robert Aaron. Economic Instability and Growth: The American Record.New York: Harper & Row, 1974.Hansen, Alvin. Full Recovery or Stagnation? New York: W. W. Norton, 1938.________FiscalPolicy and Business Cycles. New York: W. W. Norton, 1941.Johnson, G. Griffith. The Treasury and Monetary Policy. 1933—1938.Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1939.Kendrick, John W. Productivity Trends in the United States. Princeton:Princeton University Press for NBER, 1961.Lewis, W. Arthur. Economic Survey. 1919—1939. London: George Allen andUnwin, 1949.


32Lipsey,Robert E. and Doris Preston. Source Book of Statistics Related toConstruction. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1966.Mishkin, Frederic. "The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation." InTheCosts and Consecuences of Inflation edited by Karl Brunner and AlanMeltzer. Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.15, 1981. PP. 151—200.Romer, Christina D. "World War I and the Postwar Depression: AReinterpretation Based on Alternative Estimates of GNP." Journal ofMonetary Economics 22 (July 1988): 91—115.Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A NewTest in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz." NBER MacroeconomicsAnnual 4 (1989): 121—170._________"NewEvidence on the Monetary Transmission Mechanism." BrookirigsPapers on Economic Activity (1990:1): 149—213.Roose, Kenneth D. The Economics of Recession and Revival. New Haven: YaleUniversity Press, 1954Smithies, Arthur. "The American Economy in the Thirties." American EconomicReview 36 (May 1946): 11—27.Temin, Peter. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press,1989.U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Banking and MonetaryStatistics, 1943 and 1976 editions.
__________IndustrialProduction, 1986 edition._________Minutesof the Federal Open Market Committee. Various years.
__________"Structureand Uses of the MPS Quarterly Econometric Model of theUnited States." Federal Reserve Bulletin 73 (February 1987): 93—109.U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. National Income and Product Accounts. 1929—12.2.1986.U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Historical Data on the Producer Price Index.Microfiche.U.S. Department of the Treasury. Statistical Appendix to the Annual Report ofthe Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances. 1979.Weinstein, Michael. "Some Macroeconomic Impacts of the National IndustrialRecovery Act, 1933—1935." In The Great Depression Revisited edited byKarl Brunner. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981, pp. 262—281.


NOTES
1.In these calculations I use the Darby (19761 unemployment series.2. If, on the other hand, thepolicy changes were undertaken in an effort tocounteract other factors that were acting to raise output, the procedure willunderstate the effects of policy.3. The consumption data are from Kendrick 11962, Table A—ha, p. 294].4. One partial explanation for the behavior of the economy in 1921 that is hard to dismiss is a positive supply shock. Romer (1988) argues that therecovery of agricultural production in Europe and a flooding of the marketwith primary goods that had been stockpiled in peripheral countries during the war caused prices of agricultural goods in the United States to plummet in1920. This, in turn, stimulated the production of goods that use primary commodities as inputs. The presence of a favorable supply shock in thisepisode implies that the importance of policy in 1921 will be understatedbecause the fall in prices ameliorated some of the fall in real output caused by the aggregate demand policies.5. The data on Ml are from Friedman and Schwartz [1963, Table A—i, column 7, pp. 704—734].6. There are obviously alternative measures of monetary policy that could be used. One alternative that would affect the multiplier calculations would be to use the deviation of the growth rate of high—powered money from usual as the policy variable. This is true because in both 1920 and 1937 high—powered money growth was higher than normal, despite the contractionary monetarypolicies. Thus, using high—powered money as the policy variable would resultin a negative multiplier for monetary policy. The peculiar behavior of high— powered money in these two episodes is due to the fact that the monetary policy actions undertaken in both 1920 and 1937 were ones that tended todecrease the amount of money in circulation relative to the stock of reserves. Since the amount of money in circulation is what is likely to affect interest rates and spending, Ml is clearly a more sensible measure of monetary policy in these two episodes. Another alternative measure of monetary policy that one could use would be some measure of the change in real money growth; that is, the change in Ml relative to the price level. However, this would not be sensible given that this paper seeks to identify the contribution of aggregate demand policy to the recovery. Changes in nominal money are what shift theaggregate demand function; changes in real money result from the interactionof aggregate demand and aggregate supply movements. Thus, to isolate the effects of aggregate demand stimulus, one wants to use a measure of monetarypolicy that only reflects changes in demand.7. The surplus data are from the Department of the Treasury (1979, Table 2, pp. 4—11] and are based on the administrative budget. Because these data are for fiscal years, I convert them to a calendar year basis by averaging the observations for a given year and the subsequent year. The data are deflated using the implicit price deflator for CNP. The deflator series and the real GNP series for 1929—1942 are from the National Income and Product Accounts


[1986]; data for 1919—1928 are from Romer (19881. The administrative budgetdata are used instead of the NIPA surplus data because they are available on a consistent basis for the entire interwar era. While the two surplus seriesdiffer substantially in some years, the gross movements in the two series aregenerally similar. The surplus is divided by GNP to scale the variablerelative to the economy.
8.In place of the actual surplus to CNP ratio one could use the full—employment surplus to GM? ratio. I do not use this variable because it treatsa decline in revenues caused by a decline in income as normal rather thanactivist policy. This is inappropriate for the prewar and interwar eras whenraising taxes in recessions was usually preferred to letting the budget slipseriously into deficit. However, the differences between the full—employmentsurplus and the actual surplus are sufficiently small even in the worst yearsof the depression that the two measures yield similar results.9. One could start the simulations in 1929 to estimate the role of monetary developments in causing the depression. While this procedure is not strictlycorrect because some of the monetary developments in the early l930s wereclearly endogenous, the results confirm the conventional wisdom: monetaryforces had little effect during the onset of the Great Depression in 1929 and1930, but were the crucial cause of the deepening of the depression in 1931and 1932.
10. These changes in the relative sizes of the monetary and fiscal policymultipliers are an extreme case of what might happen if one took into accountthe positive supply shock in 1921 discussed in note 4. This is true becausenetting out the effect of the supply shock would tend to increase the roleassigned to the large increase in the surplus to CM? ratio that occurred in1920 and therefore decrease the role assigned to monetary policy.11. Any change in the fiscal policy multiplier that increases the role offiscal policy may alter the narrow finding of this paper that fiscal policywas unimportant, but it will strengthen the more general point that aggregatedemand stimulus was important to the recovery.12. These multipliers are reported in a recent report of the Federal ReserveBoard (1987, Tables 1 and 2). The monetary policy shock used in the MI'Ssimulation is a permanent increase in the level of Ml of 1 percent over theprojected baseline. This is equivalent to the shock I consider in mysimulations, which is a one—time deviation in the growth rate of Ml from itsnormal growth rate. I use the MPS multiplier derived from the full—modelresponse (Case 3 of Table 2). The fiscal shock used in the MPS simulation isa permanent increase in the purchases of the federal government by 1 percentof real GM? over the baseline projection. This differs from the shock Iconsider, which is a change in the surplus to CNP ratio, because tax revenueswill rise in response to the induced increase in GNP. To make the MI'Smultiplier consistent with my measure of fiscal policy, I assume that themarginal tax rate is 0.3 and then calculate the change in the surplus to CNPratio that corresponds to a 1 percent increase in federal purchases. The MI'Smultiplier that I adjust in this way is based on the full—model response, withMl fixed (Case 4 of Table 1).


13. Weinstein (1981) performs a similar calculation for monetary policy usingmultipliers derived from the Hickman—Cohen model and finds a large potentialeffect of the monetary expansion in 1934 and 1935. However, he emphasizeschat the National Industrial Recovery Act acted as a negative supply shock andcounteracted the monetary expansion. While the NIRA may indeed have stuntedthe recovery somewhat, it does not follow from this that monetary policy wasunimportant to the recovery. In the absence of the monetary expansion, thesupply shock cou'd have led to continued decline rather than to the rapidgrowth of real output that actually occurred.14. At some level it might not matter if money growth rates rose in responseto output growth because one could argue that the monetary authorities alwayshad the option of holding money growth rates at their usual level. In thiscase, policy cou'd be given credit for allowing the money supply to expandrelative to normal.15. The data are from Friedman and Schwartz 11963, Table B—3, pp. 799—808).16. The data are from Chandler (1970. p. 162).17. The U.S. also ran a small current account surplus in every year except1936 (see Bloomfield [1950, p. 269)).18. The commercial paper rate data are from the Federal Reserve Board (1943,pp. 448—451 and 1976, p. 674]. They cover 4 to 6 month prime commercial paperand are not seasonally adjusted.19. The historical data on the Producer Price Index are from the Bureau ofLabor Statistics. They are not seasonally adjusted.20. Some of the inflation in 1933 and 1934 could have been due to the NIRA,which encouraged collusion aimed at raising prices, rather than to monetarypolicy. However, the NIRA was declared unconstitutional in 1935 and itspolicies were ones that would tend to cause a one—time jump in the price levelrather than continued inflation. Thus, while some of the Initial fall in realinterest rates could have been due to the NIRA, the continued negative realrates in the mid— and late—1930s must have been due to other causes.
21. The monetary policy variable is disaggregated by converting the quarterlygrowth rates of Ml during the recovery to annual rates and then subtractingoff the average annual growth rate of Ml in the mid—1920s. The industrialproduction series is from the Federal Reserve Board [1986).22. The estimates are strikingly robust to variations in the specification ofthe regression. I have tried many variants of the basic regression, such asexcluding contemporaneous values o the explanatory variables, extending thesample period to include 1921, and leaving out the seasonal dummy variables.None of these changes alters the estimates of the ex ante real ratenoticeably.23. These data are from the National Income and Product Accounts [1986, Table1.2, p. 6).


24. The Dodge construction contract series is available in Lipsey and Preston[1966, Series A17, pp. 95—96). I use the version that shows the floor space of all types of buildings and is not already seasonally adjusted. The datafor 27 states is spliced on to data for 37 states in 1925. 1 seasonally adjust the series by regressing the logarithm of contracts on a trend, aconstant, and 3 quarterly dummy variables.25. For this calculation, I seasonally adjust the ex ante real interest rateseries by regressing it on a constant and three quarterly dummy variables.26. It is perhaps useful to mention that the conventional monetarytransmission mechanism may not have been the only way that expansionarymonetary developments stimulated real growth during the mid— and late—1930s.Many recent studies have emphasized that debt—deflation could have been animportant source of weakness in the banking sector and that banking failurescould have hurt real output by reducing the amount of credit intermediation(see, for example, Bernanke [1983]). If this is indeed the case, then theinflation generated by the tremendous increase in the money supply starting in1933 could have had a beneficial effect on the financial system. By reducing the real value of outstanding debts, the inflation may have strengthened thesolvency of banks and hastened the recovery of the financial system.


TABLE IREGRESSION USED TO ESTIMATE EX ANTE REAL INTEREST RATES
Sample Period: 1923:1 to 1942:2Dependent Variable: TheQuarterlyEx Post RealR2 —0.52Interest Rate
Expi anatory Variable Coefficient T—StatisticMonetary Policy VariableLag0Lag1Lag 2Lag3Lag4Nominal Commercial Paper RateLag 0LagILag2Lag 3Lag4Inflation RateLag 0Lag 1Lag2Lag3Lag4
Lag 1Lag 2Lag3Lag4Q2Q3Q4Constant0.044—0.4630.182—0.1960.352
0.8340.1911.1810.954—1.079
—0.3960.129—0.0140.111—0.031
—0.0260.04 5—0.1200.012—0.0361.497—6.9615.271—1.8040.29—3.021.09—1.202.30
0.250.040.220.18—0. 32
—2.540.81—0.090.72—0.21
—0.470.78—2.000.22—0.670.27—1.760.97—0.44
Sources: See text for a description of thesources used in this regression.variables and the dataChange in Industrial ProductionLag 0


TABLE 2CORRELATION BETWEEN SPENDING ANDREAL INTERESTRATES
Sample Period: 1934—1942
Percentage Change Percentage Change in in Real Fixed Real Consumer ExpendituresInvestment on Durable Coods
Ex Ante Real Rate
Lag 0 —0.687 —0.746Lag 1 —0.292 —0.238Lag 2 —0.052 —0.030
Sources:See text for a description of the variables and data sourcesused to calculate these correlation coefficients.


Per c e ut20.
15
10.
5.
0.
—s
-10
-15.FIgure 1Percentage Change inReal GNP(192 7—1942)
1927192313119331935193719391991


61/84
6


Logarithms
7 .D —
6.8—
6.6—
6 L—Figure 3Simulation for Fiscal Policy(1933—194 2)
6.2133 139 I 92Actual Real
GNP Under Normal Fiscal Policy
I I I I I I1335133613371336133319D1391


1.
—1
—3.
-.5.
—7Figure 4Fiscal Policy Variable (Lagged One year)(1923—1942)
1923192515271925153115331935193719391591Percent3.


Figure 5Simulation for Monetary Policy(1933—1942)
Logarithms7.0—
Actual Real CNP
6.8—
6.6—
/,,.7GNPUnder Normal
C .2 ——
II13333915351536133715381535159013911392


Percent16.
12
8.
9.
0.
—9
—8
-12
-16.Figure 6Monetary Policy Variable (Lagged One Year)(192 3—1942)
1923152519271925193!153319351537193919H1


Percent90
20
0.
-20
_Ll0
-SDl1gure 7NominalandExPost Real Commercial Paper Rate(Quarterly, 1929—1942)
13D L31 I32 133 13913S 135 137 336 13 19D 1M1


30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30Figure 8Estimates of the Ex Ante Real Interest Rate(Quarterly, 1929—19L2)
19291931I331935193719391991Percent
LtD


Figure 9Real Fixed Investment and Ex Ante Real Rates(1930—194 2)
Real Fixed Investment(Changein Logarithms).9
.2
0.0
-.2
-.9
-6Ex Ante Real Rates(Percent)
1930 1931 1932 1533 1931 3935 1936 1937 153B 1939 1990 199120.
16.
12.
8.
9.
0.
-6.
—12.


Figure 10Real Consumer Expenditures on Durable Goods and Ex Ante Real Rates(1930—1942)
Real Consumer Expenditures(Change in Logarithms).3
.2
.1
0 .0
—.1
—.2
—.3on Durable Goods Ex Ante Real Rates(Per ce n2D.
Is
12.
B.
9.
0
-9
-0
—12.
1930 1931 1532 1533 193M 1935 1936 1937 1938 1535 190 1991


